# Time Series Forecast - Forecasting Canadian bankruptcy rates using a VAR (Vector Autoregression) model.

##### Contributors: Donya Fozoonmayeh, Nicole Kacirek, Darren Thomas, Yuhan Wang

### Motivation
Bankruptcy rate is an issue of concern for various interested parties, including banks, insurance companies, and politicians. Accurately forecasting the bankruptcy rate would provide valuable, actionable information to individuals working in these fields. To this end, our bankruptcy rate forecasting analysis was performed using two datasets. The first, `train.csv`, contains data on bankruptcy rate, unemployment rate, population, and house price index in Canada for 28 years, from January 1987 to December 2014. Our goal is to determine which information and which time series model is most effective in forecasting the bankruptcy rate. After finalizing the model, we will then test its efficacy by forecasting the bankruptcy rate in Canada in the ensuing three years (2015 to 2017) using information from the second dataset, the `test.csv` file. This file, like the train.csv file, also contains data on unemployment rate, population and house price index. The goal is to do the best possible forecasting with a proper time series model or a set of models.

### Analyzing Available Modeling Approaches

*Univariate Time Series*
The type of model we used is referred to as a time series. A time series is a collection of data points that model the relationship between a numerical value at designated time intervals. For example, the data points in this time series will be the bankruptcy rate for every month in Canada beginning in January, 1987. Visually, this can be displayed on a graph with the bankruptcy rate recorded on the y axis, and the corresponding months indicated on the x axis. Because we are currently only looking at one variable over time, bankruptcy rate, we can define this as a *univariate time series*.

Using the univariate modeling approach allows for the option of two different methods to establish a model: *Holt-Winters* and *Box-Jenkins*. The key difference between these two models, is that the Box-Jenkins method applies some version of an autoregressive moving average (ARMA), while Holt-Winters uses some version of exponential smoothing to find the best fit of a time series model to past values of a time series. With ARMA, the past observations are weighted equally, but with Holt-Winters, exponentially is used to assign exponentially decreasing weights over time. Different versions of both ARMA and exponential smoothing exist and choosing the best depends on the trend and seasonality of the data. If the model is stationary, ARMA and single exponential smoothing can be used. If the model exhibits trend, but no seasonality, autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and double exponential smoothing must be used. Lastly, if the model demonstrates seasonality, regardless of trend, seasonal autoregressive moving average (SARIMA) or triple exponential smoothing must be used.
